[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Keep reflecting about who
you are and listening inward
and inward and inward to find
the deeper truth of your being.
I do this all the time.
I just sit quietly and just
keep listening and going
inward and cultivating a
witness of my own life.
The part of you that watches
your own life unfolding.
Most of us are so reactive.
You get up in the
morning, smell coffee.
Reaction-- boy, I
need a cup of coffee.
Watch-- my God, it's 8:15.
Reaction.
Reaction-- he cut me off.
Reaction-- oh, my God, look
what's going on in Lebanon.
You are reactive all day.
There is no reflective
moment in your day.
It's so busy being reactive to
just stuff, and you come back
and you've just had a
day full of reaction.
And you are like a
mechanical automaton.
And the newspaper knows that if
it runs up a certain headline,
you'll salute.
I mean, the ads are
designed for just you.
Certain ads that will awaken
your prurient interests.
Certain ones that will
awaken your guilt.
Certain ones that
will awaken your fear.
And then they'll play upon you.
And what happens is
you give a reaction
which is habitual and learned.
It's probably what
your father did to you
and your mother did to
you and all that stuff.
So something comes and
you say, that's nice.
Something else comes, you
say, oh, that's horrible.
As you become more
reflective, you
move from being reactive
to being responsive.
You start to mediate the input
and the reaction with space.
Depending on how you have
cultivated that inner space,
you can go into absolute
emptiness at that moment.
You just go quiet.
You don't think of the
response, you just wait.
You empty and
trust and go deeper
to feel an intuitive, a
deeper response to it.
And what comes out
is something that
comes from a deeper
part of your truth.
That's a key issue.
See, as you cultivate some
kind of reflective space
in yourself, then you are
able to process the universe
around you and provide
a response that
brings the universe back into
harmony, that is a healing
response, rather than a reactive
response which perpetuates
the suffering of the world.
And that has to do with the
emptiness of your own mind.
And when you develop
this reflective
quality, this
contemplative quality,
and then you begin
to look at your life
and you notice that you got
very holy chanting, but then
when you got on the subway,
you got very irritated.
And 10,000 times you get
holy and you get irritated,
you get holy and
you get irritated.
And if you keep watching
that, after a while,
the watcher says, this
is really off the wall.
But then that's just judgment,
and you watch the judgment.
Oh, judging.
So you just watch it.
Ah, anger, ah, bliss, ah, anger,
ah, emptiness, ah, bliss, ah,
anger, ah, irritation.
Till pretty soon, as you get on
the bus and you get irritated,
you're going, ah, irritation.
And the witness starts to
dwell with you all the time.
For me, it's my guru.
He's always hanging around
with me saying, well, Ram
Dass, pretty interesting.
Or he's laughing at
me or he's giggling.
It's like you start to have a
dialogue between the deepest
part of your being and
the part of your being
that is the familiar
personality part.
And at first, the deeper
part of your being
is an imaginary playmate
that you've created.
Later on, as it
gets stronger, it
turns out that your personality
was the imaginary playmate.
That's the transition
we're talking about.
It's bizarre when
it finally happens.